((title . "“Speed matters”, a few thoughts")
 (date . 1439135457)
 (abstract . "Thoughts on an article."))

I just read the blog post _[Speed matters: Why working quickly is more
important than it seems][speed-matters]_ and have been pretty
convinced by its argument.

This idea was already in my mind for quite some time but this post
clarified it. According to the author, _The general rule
seems to be: systems which eat items quickly are fed more items. Slow
systems starve._

I found myself, while reading this post, searching for other
situations where speed is the key, and here is a few that I find
interesting:


# Art

The first domain that striked me is art.

Music is a good example. Instrument practice requires to be able to
quickly change notes, sound and rhythm. That’s, by the way, the goal
of music training.

It’s also the case with music theory, and even reading training in
general, where quickly reading the notes and other indications on the
music sheet enables the learning of the piece to flow better.


An other artistic domain where speed gain is the goal of the training
is drawing, graphical art. I’m not an artist, but from what I could
understand, a good drawing study session if a session where the artist
improved his execution speed on a precise point.


For example, a beginner would have a hard time tracing its strokes as
he desires. But by dint of hard work, will be able to trace quickly
and precisely, and then concentrate on more specific or more difficult
points of the technique.

It appears to me now that speed gaining is the main goal of any
learning whatsoever. Mastering an element would then mean being able
to execute it quickly, and in doing so, opens the doors to more
complex elements, composed of the simpler ones.



# Programming

An other domain that I instantly thought about while reading this
article is computer programming.

The author suggests that all fast systems will tend to attract and be
reused a lot. I think that’s one of the main reasons that explain
today’s enthusiasm for dynamic programming languages like Python or
Javascript.

The speed offered by these languages are on the development cycle
side. Here, no more never-ending compilation times. We can start up
the program right after changing its source code. The feeling of loss
of inertia is highly reduced, which encourages the developer to
experiment more things in his project, since he doesn’t need to stop
and wait the end of an often long compilation.


Nevertheless, I think that trendy dynamic languages are not on their
maximum potential in terms of speed. And that these, and even all the
languages in general, would gain from having a development environment
similar to that of the Lisp languages.


Indeed, the Lisp languages have a long legacy of interactive
development environments that have taken the form of systems like
[SLIME for Common Lisp][slime] or [Geiser for Scheme][geiser].

These systems offer an instantaneous feedback. Here, more than a
development cycle without compilation times, restarting the program is
out of the question. Changes on the code are performed in real time in
the running program. Moreover, these environments offer an
instantaneous access to the documentation.

The predisposition of Lisp for these kind of environments is one of
the main reason I use these languages today. Being able to modify
every bit of code in an instant and experimenting new things in split
seconds is a real pleasure. When I have to use less evolved languages,
it feels like middle ages, and my motivation takes a blow…




# A few more leads

In my opinion, more things would gain from becoming faster.


Being a pretty shy individual, open-source project communities that
are responsive feel more friendly and encouraging to me.


If a community is responsive, I will be encouraged to try more things
in it, even if my contributions are refused. Because here, the problem
isn’t the negative response, it’s the lack of feedback, that gives an
impression of awkwardness and disdain from the entire community.


By the way, if you never contributed to an open-source project, I
highly recommend that you take a look at the CHICKEN project. Its
community is actually very responsive and will not hesitate to guide
you! It’s very stimulating!

One last point before I let you go: I think that operating systems
would benefit from fast development cycles like those of Lisp. The
current state of these systems is pretty alarming. I often wonder how
the developers of these systems cope without having a nervous
breakdown. These systems are very often written in languages like C,
where the main compilers are pretty slow. And as well as these long
compilation times, the time needed to restart the program is awfully
long, you have to restart the machine!



I always wanted to contribute to operating system projects, but I’ll
wait with hope that interactive systems will get there. A few projects
are on the right track like micro-kernel systems like [Minix][minix]
or the [RUMP subproject of NetBSD][rump].


[speed-matters]:          http://jsomers.net/blog/speed-matters
[slime]:                  https://common-lisp.net/project/slime/
[geiser]:                 http://www.nongnu.org/geiser/
[minix]:                  http://minix3.org/
[rump]:                   http://rumpkernel.org/
